in this video we're going to look at the
continuous integration workflow in terms
of theory we will define what a typical
CI workflow is as we will use it in this
video and in the next videos of this
section we will also familiarize with
maven which is the build tool that we
are going to employ in our CI workflow
in the practical part of this video
we'll start implementing the CI workflow
by foking a github repository creating a
Jenkins job and building it via maven
let's start with the continuous
integration workflow this diagram shows
the main components and interactions
within a typical CI workflow the
starting point is a code change in
github this triggers a Jenkins job that
makes use of maven to build test package
and deploy an application notifications
of an unsuccessful build or test ascent
to a slack channel in order to inform
the development team in case a build or
a test breaks in this and in the next
videos we are going to implement this CI
workflow using Jenkins github maven and
slack before we get started with this
video make sure you have the following
things set up as we will not cover them
during the demo you may have maven
already installed on your machine but if
not the easiest way to install it is via
jenkins by navigating to manage jenkins
global tool configuration maven and
other maven installation alternatively
you might want to install maven via your
operating system in this case follow the
instructions on the official maven
website in order to follow the demo you
also need a github account if you don't
have a github account yet open one on
the github website it's free before we
start using maven
let's introduce it for those who have
never used it before maven is a
cross-platform build tool and is
particularly popular although not
exclusively for building and packaging
Java projects a cool feature of maven is
the way it handles dependencies all
external modules libraries and
components necessary to build test
package and deploy a project and declare
within a so-called pom file which is a
simple XML file and download it from
public or private central repositories
this allows to avoid the so called
dependency held problem which occurs
when a project fails to build because of
missing or outdated dependencies another
important feature of maven is the
defined directory structure and build
lifecycle that impose on a software
project in fact maven Foster's the
concepts of convention over
configuration in other words maven
provides sensible default values and the
common build lifecycle to configure a
project instead of relying on self dabei
configuration and build process which
could easily become unwieldly
and difficult to follow to give you an
example
here is a typical directory structure
auto generated by maven for a Java
project
the project configuration and
dependencies are stored in the pom dot
XML file code is in SRC slash main tests
are in SRC slash tests deliverable
artifacts after the packaging process
are in target etc this diagram
illustrates the default maven build
lifecycle containing predefined phases
such as compile test package and deploy
each phase of lifecycle occur in a given
sequential order for example if you test
your application by running the command
maven test maven will run all the phases
before test compile and test compile and
will end by running the test phase in
this way you don't have to specify how
the build process works maven has
already done it for you and you can
simply use its template or customize it
for your build
now let's have a look at which part of
the CI workflow we are going to build
together in this video first we are
going to fork a github repository second
we are going to create a Jenkins job the
pulse code from the folk github
repository third we are going to use
maven to build and deploy a sample web
application before we start I'm going to
give you few references to better follow
the demo we're going to fuck the github
repositories alwah Khalil slash game of
life this is a sample Java project to
deploy a web application for playing
Conway's Game of Life this is a game
allowing the player to set up an initial
configuration and then watch it evolve
by itself if you want to know more about
the game of life check out this
Wikipedia page you will see the game in
action in this video but unfortunately
we won't spend too much time playing it
but feel free to play it and your
leisure though finally some of the
examples in these sections are taken
from the excellent book Jenkins the
definitive guide by John smart although
the book was written for Jenkins 1 and
is slightly outdated now it still
contains lots of good stuff and I
recommend to check it out now without
any further ado let's start the
practical part of this video first let's
fuck the github repository where the
game of life is located go to github.com
slash waka leo slash game of life and
make sure you are logged in into github
with your account you'll see your
profile icon if you are logged in click
on Fork this creates an exact copy of
game of life repository into your
account now let's go to Jenkins and
create a new project by clicking on new
item we are going to call this job c i
underscore workflow
choose a freestyle project and click OK
as usual we click on advanced and give a
better formatted name inside display
name in source code management we copy
the fork repository in our github
account and paste it into repository URL
your URL will be different as it uses
your github username instead of mine
make sure you use yours so you can
change the code that you will for now
we're going to run the job manually so
we won't set up a build trigger but we
will use the build trigger in the next
video finally in the build section we
add a build step and choose invoke
top-level maven targets in goals we type
install this is the maven phase allowing
to fully build test package and install
the Java project I also want to show you
how the web application for the game of
life works so you can play it if you
wish therefore and just for illustration
purposes we are going to add another
build step that invokes a top level
mailing goal in goals we type jetty
column run this starts a jetty webserver
and runs the web application so that it
can be accessed via browser on localhost
at the end of the build life cycle maven
packages the web application in a
specific directory that we need to
specify therefore we click on advanced
and in pom we type game of life
- web slash pom dot XML this is the pom
file containing the configuration and
dependencies to run the web application
for the game of life finally we click on
save
now let's build the project and run the
web application by clicking on bill
click on the status icon to get inside a
console output you can see that the job
pulls the code from the github
repository and notice the maven install
command we set up in the job
configuration
maven builds the project and runs a
bunch of tests these should all pass but
it might take a little while to complete
so I'm moving forward a bit
at the end you should see that the jetty
server has started and the job should
hang this is expected behavior as I want
to show you the web application so then
you can have a better idea of what we
are building now open your favorite web
browser and head to localhost column
9090 this is the web application for the
game of life you can also notice that
some version information are passed from
the Jenkins job into the web application
you can read the rules of the game play
a new game
and see the generations evolving at the
end do not forget to go back to the
Jenkins job stop the current hanging job
edit the configuration under build and
removed the goal that stars the jetty
web server and the web application and
click on save next time you run the job
he won't hang indefinitely this is the
end of this video where we covered a
typical CI workflow introduce the maven
build tool and started a practical
implementation of the CI workflow watch
the next video where we will continue by
setting up the testing part of the CI
workflow